Distributed DNS (RFC 0008) (#55)
Kuadrant/architecture: rfcs/0008-distributed-dns.md

## General Logic Overview

The general flow in the Kuadrant operator follows a single path, where it will always output a kuadrantRecord, which specifies everything needed for this workload on this cluster, and is unaware of the concept of distributed DNS.

This kuadrantRecord is reconciled by the DNS Operator, the DNS Operator will act with the DNS Provider's zone and ensure that the records in the zone relevant to the hosts defined within gateways on it's cluster are present. When cleaning up a DNS Record the operator will ensure all records owned by the policy for the gateway on the local cluster are removed, then the DNS Operator will also prune unresolvable records (an unresolvable record is a record that has no logical value such as an IP Address or a CNAME to a different root hostname) related to the hosts defined in the kuadrantRecords.

### Configuration Updates
There will be a new configuration option that can be applied as runtime argument (to allow us emergency configuration rescue in case of an unexpected issue) to the kuadrant-operator:

> - `clusterID`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `clusterID` (see below for how this is used)
```

  - When absent, this is generated in code (more information below). A unique string to identify this cluster apart from all other clusters.

### Changes to DNS Policy reconciler (kuadrant operator)

This will primarily need to be made aware that it will need to propagate the DNS Policy health check block into any DNS Records that it creates or updates using the provider specific fields.

> It will also need to update the format of the records in the KuadrantRecord, to make use of the new GUID and clusterID when formatting the record names and targets.

Reviewer: This is a breaking change. I am wondering if we should move to v1beta1 as part of this work? or v1alpha1

### DNS Operator

This component takes the kuadrantRecords output by the kuadrant-operator and ensure they are accurately reflected in the DNS Provider zone and currently assumes the DNS Record is the source of truth and always ensures that the zone in the DNS Provider matches the local DNS Record CR.

There are several changes required in this component:

#### Generate a ClusterID

The cluster will need a deterministic manner to generate an ID that is unique enough to not clash with other clusterIDs, that can be regenerated if ever required.

> This clusterID is used to identify which A/CNAME records were created by the local cluster

Reviewer: think I have this correct?

#### Update GUID Logic

Currently the DNS Operator builds the LB CNAME with a guid based on the name of the gateway, as this could potentially be different on different clusters, this will need to be updated to generate based on the zone's root hostname, to ensure it is consistently generated on all clusters that interact with this zone.

#### Ensure local records are accurate

When the local KuadrantRecord is updated, the DNS Operator will ensure those values are present in the zone by interacting directly with the DNS Provider - however it will now only remove existing records if the name contains the local clusters clusterID, it will also remove CNAME values, if the value contains the local clusters clusterID.

#### Cleanup

When a DNS Policy is marked for deletion the kuadrant operator will delete all relevant kuadrantRecords.

Whenever a deleted kuadrantRecord is reconciled by the DNS Operator, it will remove any relevant records from the DNS Provider (i.e. any record with the clusterID in the name. and any target with the clusterID in the target) for the deleted kuadrantZone's root host.

#### Prune dead branches from DNS Records

> If a KuadrantRecord is deleting, there is the potential that we are creating a dead branch, which will need to be recursively cleaned until none remain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a KuadrantRecord is deleting, there is the potential that we are leaving behind a dead branch, which will need to be recursively cleaned until none remain.
```

What is a dead branch? If a CNAME exists whose value is a record that does not exist, this CNAME will not resolve, as our DNS Records are structured similarly to a tree, this will be referenced as a "dead branch".

> The controller will need to work through the DNS Record and ensure that from hostname to A (or external CNAME) records is structurally sound and that any dead branches are removed, to do this, the DNS Operator will need to first read what is published in the provider zone:

Reviewer: Do we want to just mention that if a cluster or dns record is re-created. Those branches will get recreated if for example a new dnspolicy in another cluster wiht the same geo gets created?

# Distributed DNS Load Balancing

- Feature Name: Distributed DNS Load Balancing
- Start Date: 2024-01-17
- RFC PR: [Kuadrant/architecture#0008](https://github.com/Kuadrant/architecture/pull/55)
- Issue tracking: [Kuadrant/architecture#0008](https://github.com/Kuadrant/architecture/issues/56)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Enable the DNS Operator to manage DNS for one or more hostnames shared across one or more clusters.  Remove the requirement for a central "hub" cluster or multi-cluster control plane.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

Currently, the DNS operator has limited functionality for a single cluster, and none for multiple clusters without OCM. Having the DNS operator enabled to manage DNS in these situations significantly eases onboarding users to leveraging DNSPolicy across both single and multi-cluster deployments.

# Diagrams
[diagrams]: #diagrams

- ![Distributed DNS](0008-distributed-dns-assets%2F0008-distributed-dns.jpg)
- ![Load Balanced DNS Records](0008-distributed-dns-assets%2F0008-loadbalanced-dns-records.jpg)

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

## Single Cluster and Multiple Cluster

> Every cluster requires a DNS Policy configured with a provider secret. Every zone will be treated as a distributed DNS zone. In each cluster, when a matching listener host defined in the gateway is found that matches one of the available zones in the provider the addresses from that gateway will be appended to the zone file - in a non-destructive manner - allowing multiple clusters to all add their gateways addresses to the same zone file, without destroying each other's values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every cluster requires a DNS Policy targeting a valid gateway and configured with a dns service provider secret. In each cluster, when a matching listener host defined in the gateway is found that matches one of the available zones in the provider the addresses from that gateway will be appended to the zone file - in a non-destructive manner - allowing multiple clusters to all add their gateways addresses to the same zone file, without destroying each other's values.
```

### Health Checks
The health checks provided by the various DNS Providers will be used.

## OCM / ACM

> This is very similar, with the caveat that the "cluster" is the hub cluster for this OCM and that the gateway will be a Kuadrant gatewayClass.

Reviewer: No not necessary if just using DNS

## Migrating from single/multiple clusters to OCM

This is not covered.

## Cleanup

> Cleanup of a cluster's zone file entries is triggered by deleting the DNS Policy that caused the kuadrantRecords to be created.

Reviewer: do we want to drop the `kuadrantRecord` term now? and just replace with dnsRecord?

Reviewer: I see zone record is used so perhaps they are still two separate terms. Might be worth bumping the terminology up the doc?

Reviewer: We are moving to a single record with the zone in the status of that record

The DNS policy will have a finalizer, when it is deleted the controller will mark the created kuadrantRecords for deletion.

The kuadrantRecords will have a finalizer from the DNS Operator which will clean the records from the zone before removing the finalizer.

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

> ## Terminology

Reviewer: These terms are used above so perhaps move up?

 - zone / DNS Provider zone: The set of records listed in the DNS Provider (the live list of DNS records)
 - KuadrantRecord: The DNSRecord created on the local cluster by Kuadrant - only contains the DNS requirements for the local cluster
 - ZoneRecord: The DNSRecord created on the local cluster by the DNS Operator, this reflects the DNSRecord as it appears in the zone.
 - Root Host: The listener on a gateway that caused the Kuadrant Operator to create a KuadrantRecord (i.e the host that the users will be interacting with)

## General Logic Overview

The general flow in the Kuadrant operator follows a single path, where it will always output a kuadrantRecord, which specifies everything needed for this workload on this cluster, and is unaware of the concept of distributed DNS.

> This kuadrantRecord is reconciled by the DNS Operator, the DNS Operator will act with the DNS Provider's zone and ensure that the records in the zone relevant to the hosts defined within gateways on it's cluster are present. When cleaning up a DNS Record the operator will ensure all records owned by the policy for the gateway on the local cluster are removed, then the DNS Operator will also prune unresolvable records (an unresolvable record is a record that has no logical value such as an IP Address or a CNAME to a different root hostname) related to the hosts defined in the kuadrantRecords.

Reviewer: No the only the Kuadrant Operator will interact with the gateways

### Configuration Updates

> There will be a new configuration option that can be applied as runtime argument (to allow us emergency configuration rescue in case of an unexpected issue) to the kuadrant-operator:

Reviewer: Well the Kuadrant Operator is just aware of how to construct the DNSRecord leveraging an ID. The DNSOperator is aware of the DNSRecord and the provider and the fact it may be in multiple clusters. The hard multi-cluster work is all done by the DNS Operator

- `clusterID`  (see below for how this is used)
  - When absent, this is generated in code (more information below). A unique string to identify this cluster apart from all other clusters.

### Changes to DNS Policy reconciler (kuadrant operator)

This will primarily need to be made aware that it will need to propagate the DNS Policy health check block into any DNS Records that it creates or updates using the provider specific fields.

It will also need to update the format of the records in the KuadrantRecord, to make use of the new GUID and clusterID when formatting the record names and targets.

### DNS Operator

This component takes the kuadrantRecords output by the kuadrant-operator and ensure they are accurately reflected in the DNS Provider zone and currently assumes the DNS Record is the source of truth and always ensures that the zone in the DNS Provider matches the local DNS Record CR.

There are several changes required in this component:

#### Generate a ClusterID

The cluster will need a deterministic manner to generate an ID that is unique enough to not clash with other clusterIDs, that can be regenerated if ever required.

> This clusterID is used as a prefix to identify which A/CNAME records were created by the local cluster

Reviewer 2: I can imagine more usage for clusterIDs beyond DNS (e.g. for global rate limiting.) I wonder if generating the clusterID shouldn't be a function of Kuadrant Operator.

The relation with the DNS Operator would then invert. Maybe the DNS Operator only needs to know about cluster IDs for the heartbeats. All the rest of the info it needs is in the DNSRecord CR.

The suggestion [here](https://groups.google.com/g/kubernetes-sig-architecture/c/mVGobfD4TpY/m/nkdbkX1iBwAJ) is to use the UID of the `kube-system` namespace, as this [cannot be deleted easily](https://groups.google.com/g/kubernetes-sig-architecture/c/mVGobfD4TpY/m/lR4SnaqpAAAJ) - so is practically speaking indelible.

We can take the UID of that namespace and apply a hashing algorithm to result in 6-7 character code which can be used as the clusterID for the local cluster.

#### Update GUID Logic

Currently the DNS Operator builds the LB CNAME with a guid based on the name of the gateway, as this could potentially be different on different clusters, this will need to be updated to generate based on the zone's root hostname, to ensure it is consistently generated on all clusters that interact with this zone.

#### Ensure local records are accurate

> When the local KuadrantRecord is updated, the DNS Operator will ensure those values are present in the zone by interacting directly with the DNS Provider - however it will now only remove existing records if the name contains the local clusters clusterID, it will also remove CNAME values, if the value contains the local clusters clusterID.

Reviewer: No, Kuadrant Opertor updates the DNSRecord. DNSOperator ensures that these records are written to the provider and validates they are still present a short time afterwards

> When the local KuadrantRecord is updated, the DNS Operator will ensure those values are present in the zone by interacting directly with the DNS Provider - however it will now only remove existing records if the name contains the local clusters clusterID, it will also remove CNAME values, if the value contains the local clusters clusterID.

Reviewer: on the second comment. The DNSOperator is removing from the local copy of the zone before re-writing them based on the current state of the DNSRecord

> Whenever the DNS Operator does a create or update on the zone (but not a delete), it will requeue the KuadrantRecord for TTL / 2, to verify the results are present. This is identified when the observedGeneration and Generation are equal, we should list the zone and ensure all expected records are present. If they are absent, add them and requeue to verify again.

Reviewer: That is just a kubernetes thing. Managed by the API server

#### Cleanup

When a DNS Policy is marked for deletion the kuadrant operator will delete all relevant kuadrantRecords.

> Whenever a deleted kuadrantRecord is reconciled by the DNS Operator, it will remove any relevant records from the DNS Provider (i.e. any record with the clusterID prefix in the name. and any target with the clusterID in the target) for the deleted kuadrantZone's root host.

Reviewer: See next section about pruning. Each controller when deleting a value, does a prune check and removes any dead branches.

#### Prune dead branches from DNS Records

If a KuadrantRecord is deleting, there is the potential that we are leaving behind a dead branch, which will need to be recursively cleaned until none remain.

What is a dead branch? If a CNAME exists whose value is a record that does not exist, this CNAME will not resolve, as our DNS Records are structured similarly to a tree, this will be referenced as a "dead branch".

> The controller will need to work through the DNS Record and ensure that from hostname to A (or external CNAME) records is structurally sound and that any dead branches are removed, to do this, the DNS Operator will need to first read what is published in the provider zone:

Reviewer: This is handled by the DNSOperator. It will do the prune. On the verify loop it will validate that its own values/records are gone **ONLY** it will not re-prune if no dead branch is found

#### Build ZoneRecord from the provider zone

> When the DNS Operator has finished reconciling a deleting kuadrantRecord it will pull the most recent records from the DNS Provider and construct a separate zoneRecord for the same root host as the deleting kuadrantRecord.

Reviewer: moving to single DNSRecords using status to reflect the zone records

#### Prune the zoneRecord

It will recursively analyse the zoneRecord and ensure that it is structurally sound and that all records can be resolved to at least one external CNAME or A record.

If during this pruning period the zoneRecord is modified, then these modifications will need to be sent to the DNS Provider to clean the zone.

Once completed, the zoneRecord can be deleted (this may be possible to only reflect in memory completely).

#### Removing the finalizer from kuadrantRecords

> When a kuadrantRecord is reconciled, the DNS Operator should apply a finalizer to it.

Reviewer: We have set lots of finalizers :) Yes it is always the first things set in a reconcile loop

When a kuadrantRecord is being removed, the following must be successfully completed before the finalizer can be removed:
- Remove the local clusters records and targets from the relevant zone
- Perform a prune on the relevant root host
- Apply the results of the prune to the DNS Provider

Only once these actions have all resolved should the finalizer be removed, and the kuadrantRecord allowed to be deleted.

Should a deleted DNS Record be recreated, or a deleted DNS Policy be restored, all of the deleted records will be restored by the DNS Operator, at that point.

#### Aggregating Status

When the DNS Operator performs actions based on the state of a kuadrantRecord, it should update the kuadrantRecord status with results of these actions, similar to how it is currently implemented.

When the Kuadrant operator sees these statuses on the kuadrantRecords related to a DNS Policy, it should aggregate them into a consolidated status on the DNS Policy status.

> It will be possible from this DNS Policy status to determine that all the records for this cluster, related to this DNS Policy, have been accepted by the DNS Provider.

Reviewer: Yes this will be reflected. If the validation loop fails to a max back off (think about it like the image pull back off) we will flag if we hit a max back off in the status (this is a flag that the state is constantly changing)

#### Routing Strategies

There are currently 2 routing strategies "simple" and "loadbalanced".

##### Simple

> The simple strategy is also compatible with ExternalDNS which makes it useful in some use-cases. This strategy outputs a very simplistic zone file and will only be functional with a single cluster.

Reviewer: Both will now be able to be  used in multi-cluster or single cluster

##### Loadbalanced
This strategy outputs a DNS record tree with various levels of CNAMEs to allow for geo loadbalancing as well as loadbalancing within a geo and is compatible with multiple clusters.

This can be seen here: ![Load Balanced DNS Records](0008-distributed-dns-assets%2F0008-loadbalanced-dns-records.jpg)

##### Migration

> These 2 strategies are not compatible, and as such the RoutingStrategy field will be set to immutable, requiring the deletion and recreation of the DNS Policy in order to update this value. This will result in the related records being removed from the zone before being created in the new format.

Reviewer: THis will result in a flip/flop scenerio and unresolvable state which will be spotted by the max back off validation check mentioned above and flagged in the status

> These 2 strategies are not compatible, and as such the RoutingStrategy field will be set to immutable, requiring the deletion and recreation of the DNS Policy in order to update this value. This will result in the related records being removed from the zone before being created in the new format.

Reviewer: RFC wil be updated to make this clearer

#### Metrics

Some useful metrics have been determined:
- Emit a metric whenever the DNS Operator writes to the zone.

> - Emit a metric whenever the kuadrant operator updates the kuadrantZone spec.

Reviewer: I actually think it would be valuable not just the but also flag address changes. IE so I can answer how many address changes happened in the last x amount of time

- Emit a metric whenever the DNS Operator deletes an entry from the zone.
- Emit a metric whenever the DNS Operator prunes a shared record from the zone.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

> clean up in disaster scenario for multi-cluster:

Reviewer: Health checks will remove these records from the response. In a single cluster right now if you nuked the cluster you would also have a situation where the records were left behind. I see no difference here between single and multi-cluster. Yes there is the potential in a disaster scenerio for records to be left behind (this is true of any kubernetes API that interacts with an external service) IMO

> clean up in disaster scenario for multi-cluster:

Reviewer 2: > Additonally a heart beat option would help also to allow other clusters to spot dead clusters

I was thinking something along these lines. Could we establish a protocol for the leftover clusters to perform the cleanup on behalf of the nuked one? I suppose if the nuked cluster is ever reborn from the ashes, it will sanitise the records anyway.

> clean up in disaster scenario for multi-cluster:

Reviewer 2: Never mind. Just read to the heartbeat section 🙂

> - any cluster nuked without time to cleanup will never be cleaned from the zone.

Reviewer: Yes

> API usage limits on DNS providers:

Reviewer: per account

- [Google](https://cloud.google.com/service-usage/docs/quotas) - 240 read requests per minute, 60 writes per minute
- [Azure](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/azure-resource-manager/management/request-limits-and-throttling) - 60 lists and 1000 gets per minute, 40 writes per minute
- [Route53](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/Route53/latest/DeveloperGuide/DNSLimitations.html) - 5 API requests per second read or write
- No health checks for private clusters

# Rationale and alternatives
[rationale-and-alternatives]: #rationale-and-alternatives

- It is the most robust, and can handle the failure of any cluster
- It provides the most valuable and robust DNS health checking network
- Allows MGC without OCM/ACM
- It provides the most simple migration procedure from single to multiple clusters
- It provides a simple and useful demo without excessive setup

# Prior art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

No prior art.

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

> - Dealing with significant portions of the cluster groups going offline unexpectedly.

Reviewer: host name group? It is a group of clusters that share a hostname

# Future possibilities
[future-possibilities]: #future-possibilities

> ## Heartbeat Check

Reviewer: It might be still relevant (although less impactful) to ensure orphaned records are cleaned up eventually. If a health check is in place these orphaned records should not make it to the client

# Distributed DNS Load Balancing

- Feature Name: Distributed DNS Load Balancing
- Start Date: 2024-01-17
- RFC PR: [Kuadrant/architecture#0008](https://github.com/Kuadrant/architecture/pull/55)
- Issue tracking: [Kuadrant/architecture#0008](https://github.com/Kuadrant/architecture/issues/56)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

> Enable the DNS Operator to manage DNS for one or more hostnames shared across one or more clusters, where a central "hub" cluster is not required or may not be available, and increase the robustness of the DNS Health checks by executing them from all the available clusters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enable the DNS Operator to manage DNS for one or more hostnames shared across one or more clusters.  Remove the requirement for a central "hub" cluster or multi-cluster control plane. Increase the robustness of the DNS Health checks by executing them from all the available clusters.
```

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

> Currently, the DNS record controller has limited functionality for a single cluster, and none for multiple clusters without OCM. Having the DNSRecord controller enabled to manage DNS in these situations significantly eases onboarding users to the advantages of the DNSRecord controller.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, the DNS operator has limited functionality for a single cluster, and none for multiple clusters without OCM. Having the DNS operator enabled to manage DNS in these situations significantly eases onboarding users to leveraging DNSPolicy across both single and multi-cluster deployments.
```

# Diagrams
[diagrams]: #diagrams

- ![Use Cases](0008-distributed-dns-assets%2Fdynamic-dns-use-cases.jpg)
- ![P2P Health Checks](0008-distributed-dns-assets%2Fdynamic-dns-health-checks.jpg)
- ![DNS Prunin](0008-distributed-dns-assets%2Fdynamic-dns-dns-pruning.jpg)
- ![DNS Controller](0008-distributed-dns-assets%2Fdynamic-dns-dns-controller.jpg)

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

## Single Cluster and Multiple Cluster

> In a multiple cluster scenario, every cluster requires a DNS Policy configured with a provider secret, any that reference the same zone(s) in the same DNS Provider for the same host will behave as a distributed DNS. In each cluster, when a matching listener host defined in the gateway is found that matches one of the available zones in the provider the addresses from that gateway will be appended to the zone file - in a non-destructive manner - allowing multiple clusters to all add their gateways addresses to the same zone file, without destroying each other's values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a multiple cluster scenario, every cluster requires a DNS Policy configured with a provider secret. If a provider secret reference the same zone(s) in the same backing DNS Provider for the same host, it will be treated as a distributed DNS target. In each cluster, when a matching listener host defined in the gateway is found that matches one of the available zones in the provider the addresses from that gateway will be appended to the zone file - in a non-destructive manner - allowing multiple clusters to all add their gateways addresses to the same zone file, without destroying each other's values.
```

### Health Checks

> If health checks are defined in the DNS Policy, these will be created on all clusters. When a health check is failing, a TXT record is added/amended in the zone to note the failure - should the percentage of failing clusters exceed the `MultiClusterFailureThreshold` (configured in the DNS Policy), that unhealthy IP is removed from the zone by any cluster with an unhealthy check on that IP.

Reviewer: As discussed on a call. Lets remove this from the API for now, use a default of 20% and then allow it to be overridden at the controller level initially. We can look to move to the API if we get enough requests / see enough use cases. Removing it removes configuration and complexity that the user can get wrong in a MC scenerio

Reviewer: I guess potentially we could allow it as an annotation on the DNSPolicy and marked as experimental or something also

If all health checks for a particular host are marked as unhealthy, all known IPs are published, to avoid an NXDOMAIN response.

## OCM / ACM
This is very similar, with the caveat that the "cluster" is the hub cluster for this OCM and that the gateway will be a Kuadrant gatewayClass.

## Migrating from single/multiple clusters to OCM

This is not covered.

## Cleanup

Cleanup of a cluster's zone file entries is triggered by deleting the DNS Policy that caused the DNS Records to be created.

The DNS policy will have a finalizer, when it is deleted the controller will mark the created DNS Records for deletion.

The DNS Records will have a finalizer from the DNS Operator which will clean the records from the zone before removing the finalizer.

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

## Terminology
 - zone / DNS Provider zone: The set of records listed in the DNS Provider (the live list of DNS records)
 - KuadrantRecord: The DNSRecord created on the local cluster by Kuadrant - only contains the DNS requirements for the local cluster

>  - ZoneRecord: The DNSRecord created on the local cluster by the DNS Operator, this sreflects the DNSRecord as it appears in the zone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - ZoneRecord: The DNSRecord created on the local cluster by the DNS Operator, this reflects the DNSRecord as it appears in the zone.
```

## General Logic Overview

> The general flow for in the Kuadrant operator follows a single path, where it will always output a DNS Record which specifies everything needed for this workload on this cluster, and is unaware of the concept of distributed DNS, or phrased more simply:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The general flow for in the Kuadrant operator follows a single path, where it will always output a DNS Record (kuadrantRecord) which specifies everything needed for this workload on this cluster, and is unaware of the concept of distributed DNS, or phrased more simply:
```

Build a DNS Record based on the local gateways and DNS Policy.

> This kuadrantRecord is reconciled by the DNS Operator, the DNS Operator will act with the DNS Provider's zone as the authority and ensure that the records in the zone relevant to the hosts defined within gateways on it's cluster are accurate. When cleaning up a DNS Record the operator will ensure all records owned by the policy for the gateway on the local cluster are removed and then prune unresolvable records related to the hosts defined in the gateway from the DNS Provider zone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This kuadrantRecord is reconciled by the DNS Operator, the DNS Operator will act with the DNS Provider's zone as the authority and ensure that the records in the zone relevant to the hosts defined within gateways on it's cluster are accurate. When cleaning up a DNS Record the operator will ensure all records owned by the policy for the gateway on the local cluster are removed and then prune unresolvable records (an unresolvable record is a record that has no logical value such as an IP Address or a CNAME to a different root hostname) related to the hosts defined in the gateway from the DNS Provider zone.
```

### API Updates
New configuration options in the providerSecret:

> - `RefreshInterval`

Reviewer: Think we can remove this now and make them flag options on the controller as "here be dragons but get out of jail free cards"

There are several changes required in this component:

#### Generate a ClusterID

The cluster will need a deterministic manner to generate an ID that is unique enough to not clash with other clusterIDs, but determinstic enough that it can be regenerated if ever required.

This clusterID is used for multiple purposes:
- To identify which A/CNAME records were created by which cluster
- To see how many clusters have interacted with this zone (number of unique cluster IDs in all A/CNAME records)
- To report a failing health check
- To count how many clusters are reporting a failing health check.

The suggestion [here](https://groups.google.com/g/kubernetes-sig-architecture/c/mVGobfD4TpY/m/nkdbkX1iBwAJ) is to use the UID of the `kube-system` namespace, as this [cannot be deleted easily](https://groups.google.com/g/kubernetes-sig-architecture/c/mVGobfD4TpY/m/lR4SnaqpAAAJ) - so is practically speaking indelible.

> We can take the UID of that namespace and apply a hashing algorithm to result in 6-7 character code which can be used as the clusterID for the local cluster.

Reviewer: 👍

#### Build DNS Records from the provider zone

When the DNS Operator reconciles a kuadrantRecord and will first pull the most recent records from the DNS Provider and construct a separate zoneRecord.

These zoneRecords will be created with the DNS Operator set as the owner, so they can be identified in the future. When reconciling a DNS Record is being reconciled by the DNS Operator, first check if it is owned by the DNS Operator and if so, do nothing - these DNS Records should never be reconciled.

As this could result in many requests to the DNS Provider API a mechanism is required to reduce this to only request when required:

#### Testing if a DNS Provider pull is Required

When the DNS Operator publishes any changes to a zone, it will also add/update a (`kuadrant.last_modified_at`) TXT record with the current timestamp.

If the DNS Operator has no local zoneRecords for a zone, it will list and build the zoneRecords.

> If the DNS Operator already has zoneRecords (and their lastModified time is older than the refreshInterval, more on this later) it will first execute a GET request for the `kuadrant.last_modified_at` TXT record, if the value of that field is more recent than the zoneRecords lastModified time, then the DNS Operator will list and rebuild it's zoneRecords.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the DNS Operator already has zoneRecords (and their lastModified time is older than the refreshInterval, more on this later) it will first execute a GET request for the `kuadrant.last_modified_at` TXT record, if the value of that field is more recent than the zoneRecords lastModified time, then the DNS Operator will list and rebuild it's zoneRecords. The reason for this GET is some providers offer much higher limits on a GET of single record over a list of the zone (see the limits section).
```

> If the zoneRecords lastModified time is less old than the refreshInterval, a GET and possibly a LIST should only be executed when the spec of the kuadrantRecord has changed (as this will likely result in a write to the API).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the zoneRecords lastModified time is less than the next refresh time, an API request should only be executed when the spec of the kuadrantRecord has changed (as this will likely result in a write to the API).
```

#### Ensure local records are accurate

> Once the zoneRecord is created / updated on cluster, the operator will then scan through this zoneRecord and remove any records for the local cluster. Then inject the values from the kuadrantRecord into the zoneRecord. After this the DNS Operator will sanity check the result and prune any bad records (we will expand on that later). Once the zoneRecord is updated and sanity checked, if it has changed then the result is sent back to the DNS Provider so that the zone can be updated and made accurate (with an added update to the `kuadrant.last_modified_at`) TXT record.

Reviewer: I guess this is only needed if the observedGeneration of the kuadrantRecord is updated? IE if the spec is changed?

Reviewer: ````kuadrant.last_modified_at`) TXT record.```
This field can't be locked. So it is possible / likely that sometimes one controller will set this to an older value than another. Not sure if that matters. But this is a little bit of a fire and forget operation. I imagine the variation in time will be small however as the only thing that is triggering this is a change that needs to be written to the zone. So the value should be calculated immediately before the API call to make it as accurate as possible?

Author: no, we also need it if no changes have occurred locally to ensure we have all the health checks needed for other clusters changes.

#### Update response to failing health check 

> After ensuring its own ClusterID is present in the relevant TXT record, the controller will count the totalClusters which is the sum of unique clusterIDs in that hosts DNS records. Then it will count the reportingClusters which is the number of clusterIDs in the relevant TXT record, if `reportingClusters/totalClusters >= HealthCheck.MultiClusterFailureThreshold` then this IP will be removed for this host.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After ensuring its own ClusterID is present in the relevant TXT record, the controller will count the totalClusters which is the sum of unique clusterIDs in that hosts DNS records. Then it will count the reportingClusters which is the number of clusterIDs in the relevant TXT record, if `reportingClusters/totalClusters >= HealthCheck.MultiClusterFailureThreshold` and it is not the last IP for this host then this IP will be removed for this host.
```

example healthcheck TXT record:
```
myapp.pb.apps.com/24.34.45.56: ghye7d34; lhoyg391
```

As this TXT record can be quite long (when many clusters are present), if this fields exceeds a DNS Record limit (255 characters), it will run into a second TXT record with the same key.

Example multiple healthcheck TXT record:
```
myapp.pb.apps.com/24.34.45.56: ghye7d34; lhoyg391; ... <more clusterIDs>
myapp.pb.apps.com/24.34.45.56: hir01fcd; aoe8912;
```

##### Handling no IPs published

> If after processing the health checks the result is a DNS Record with no A records, then all of the A records will be persisted (this is to avoid an NXDOMAIN response).

Reviewer: bit confused on how this will work. If there are 3 ips and 2 get removed for failing healthcheck reasons, then the final one is going to be removed, how will the controller doing that know what to restore? Or will it use the health check txt record to know "all are failing so ensure all IPs here are in the DNS response"?

Reviewer: as discussed, the correct set of healthchecks == all live IPs plus all failing ips

Author: I will elaborate on this.

#### Regularly reconcile DNS Records

> As changes to the zone file can happen without triggering an event in the DNS Operator, the operator will need to poll the DNS Provider in order to ensure that it has an accurate set of records to ensure that changes in the zone are not missed. e.g. a cluster would not have health checks for any clusters that were added since it last read the zone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As changes to the zone file can happen without triggering an event in the DNS Operator, the operator will need to poll the DNS Provider in order to ensure that it has an accurate set of records. e.g. a cluster would not have health checks for any clusters that were added since it last read the zone.
```

> This interval is defined in the ProviderSecret `RefreshInterval` and defaults to the shortest TTL it is using in the DNS records. This is modifiable to handle a scenario where the DNS Provider is rate-limiting the requests due to being polled too frequently.

Reviewer: as discussed think we can remove and jsut have an optional flag on controller

If an attempted reconcile receives a rate limited response from the API then it will apply a shudder to it's requeue time to avoid this occurring again. This shudder is between -5% and 5% delay.

examples:
- An operator with a 60 second refresh interval sees a rate limit response, so requeues for a value between 57 and 63 seconds.

> - An operator with a 60 second refresh interval sees a rate limit response, so requeues for a value between 114 and 126 seconds.

Reviewer: is this second example correct?

Author: no, I will update it.

# Diagrams
[diagrams]: #diagrams

- ![Use Cases](0008-distributed-dns-assets%2Fdynamic-dns-use-cases.jpg)
- ![P2P Health Checks](0008-distributed-dns-assets%2Fdynamic-dns-health-checks.jpg)
- ![DNS Pruning](0008-distributed-dns-assets%2Fdynamic-dns-dns-pruning.jpg)
- ![DNS Controller](0008-distributed-dns-assets%2Fdynamic-dns-dns-controller.jpg)

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

## Single Cluster and Multiple Cluster
In a multiple cluster scenario, every cluster requires a DNS Policy configured with a provider secret. If a provider secret reference the same zone(s) in the same backing DNS Provider for the same host, it will be treated as a distributed DNS target. In each cluster, when a matching listener host defined in the gateway is found that matches one of the available zones in the provider the addresses from that gateway will be appended to the zone file - in a non-destructive manner - allowing multiple clusters to all add their gateways addresses to the same zone file, without destroying each other's values.

### Health Checks

> If health checks are defined in the DNS Policy, these will be created on all clusters. When a health check is failing, a TXT record is added/amended in the zone to note the failure - should the percentage of failing clusters exceed the `MultiClusterFailureThreshold` (configured in the DNS Policy), that unhealthy IP is removed from the zone by any cluster with an unhealthy check on that IP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If health checks are defined in the DNS Policy, these will be created and executed from the same cluster where the DNSPolicy is defined and target each cluster using that listener host name. When a health check is failing, a TXT record is added/amended in the zone to note the failure - should the percentage of failing clusters exceed the failure threshold (66%) by default but overridable via flag on the controller  , that unhealthy IP is removed from the zone by any cluster with an unhealthy check on that IP. While 66% is a little arbitrary, it can be changed and gives a decent base line of 2 out of every 3 clusters failing before an IP is removed.
```

Reviewer 3: If it is configured in the controller, it needs to be configured on all controllers with the same value right, otherwise it might cause issues

Reviewer: yes although that would be in a purposeful override scenerio. Which we should def document

## OCM / ACM
This is very similar, with the caveat that the "cluster" is the hub cluster for this OCM and that the gateway will be a Kuadrant gatewayClass.

## Migrating from single/multiple clusters to OCM

This is not covered.

## Cleanup

Cleanup of a cluster's zone file entries is triggered by deleting the DNS Policy that caused the DNS Records to be created.

The DNS policy will have a finalizer, when it is deleted the controller will mark the created DNS Records for deletion.

The DNS Records will have a finalizer from the DNS Operator which will clean the records from the zone before removing the finalizer.

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

## Terminology
 - zone / DNS Provider zone: The set of records listed in the DNS Provider (the live list of DNS records)
 - KuadrantRecord: The DNSRecord created on the local cluster by Kuadrant - only contains the DNS requirements for the local cluster
 - ZoneRecord: The DNSRecord created on the local cluster by the DNS Operator, this reflects the DNSRecord as it appears in the zone.

## General Logic Overview

> The general flow for in the Kuadrant operator follows a single path, where it will always output a DNS Record (kuadrantRecord) which specifies everything needed for this workload on this cluster, and is unaware of the concept of distributed DNS, or phrased more simply:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The general flow in the Kuadrant operator follows a single path, where it will always output a local DNS Record referred to as the (kuadrantRecord) which specifies everything needed for this workload on this cluster, and is unaware of the concept of distributed DNS, or phrased more simply:
```

Build a DNS Record based on the local gateways and DNS Policy.

> This kuadrantRecord is reconciled by the DNS Operator, the DNS Operator will act with the DNS Provider's zone as the authority and ensure that the records in the zone relevant to the hosts defined within gateways on it's cluster are accurate. When cleaning up a DNS Record the operator will ensure all records owned by the policy for the gateway on the local cluster are removed and then prune unresolvable records (an unresolvable record is a record that has no logical value such as an IP Address or a CNAME to a different root hostname) related to the hosts defined in the gateway from the DNS Provider zone.

Reviewer 4: Are you saying here the DNS Operator is interacting with gateways?

Reviewer: I chatted with @philbrookes on this, no the DNS Operator wouldn't interact with the gateway but needs to be aware of if the address of the gateway changed. So I imagine here the DNSPolicy controller is indicating that in some way to the DNS Operator.

### API Updates
New configuration options that can be applied as runtime arguments (to allow us emergency configuration rescue in case of an unexpected issue):
- `RefreshInterval`
  - When absent it defaults to the shortest TTL of created records (and can be backed off in case of encountering API rate-limits). This is how often in seconds to reconcile the DNS Records in order to pull fresh zone values from the DNS Provider.
- `MultiClusterFailureThreshold`
  - When absent defaults to `66`, what percentage of clusters need to be reporting an endpoint unhealthy on a remote IP for it to be removed from the zone by a cluster that does not own that IP.
- `clusterID`
  - When absent is generated in code (more information below). A unique string to identify this cluster apart from all other clusters.

New fields added to the DNS Record CRD:
- `HealthCheck`
  - Propagated from the DNS Policy, to facilitate reconciling health checks in the DNS controller.

### Changes to DNS Policy reconciler (kuadrant operator)

> This will primarily need to be made aware of the new fields on the DNS Policy (Healthcheck block) that it will need to propagate into any DNS Records that it creates or updates. Otherwise the logic of this controller remains largely the same.

Reviewer: @philbrookes wont the DNSPolicy reconciler need to indicate a change of address also?

Author: This could be necessary, though I'd hope we can see the change of IP in the DNS operator without needing to indicate it from the Kuadrant operator.

This clusterID is used for multiple purposes:
- To identify which A/CNAME records were created by which cluster
- To see how many clusters have interacted with this zone (number of unique cluster IDs in all A/CNAME records)
- To report a failing health check
- To count how many clusters are reporting a failing health check.

The suggestion [here](https://groups.google.com/g/kubernetes-sig-architecture/c/mVGobfD4TpY/m/nkdbkX1iBwAJ) is to use the UID of the `kube-system` namespace, as this [cannot be deleted easily](https://groups.google.com/g/kubernetes-sig-architecture/c/mVGobfD4TpY/m/lR4SnaqpAAAJ) - so is practically speaking indelible.

We can take the UID of that namespace and apply a hashing algorithm to result in 6-7 character code which can be used as the clusterID for the local cluster.

#### Update GUID Logic

Currently the DNS Operator builds the LB CNAME with a guid based on the name of the gateway, as this could potentially be different on different clusters, this will need to be updated to generate based on the zone's root hostname, to ensure it is consistently generated on all clusters that interact with this zone.

#### Build DNS Records from the provider zone

> When the DNS Operator reconciles a kuadrantRecord and will first pull the most recent records from the DNS Provider and construct a separate zoneRecord.

Reviewer 4: Is this "kuadrantRecord" just a DNSRecord, or a new resource?

Reviewer: yeah I found this terminology confusing also. But it is just another DNSRecord

Author: yeah, I was just trying to simplify the 2 different concepts (zoneRecord is a local cache of the values in the zone, kuadrantZone is the local description of what Kuadrant wants to be present in the zone). Calling them by descriptions like "the record created by Kuadrant" and "the record that reflects the zone" was making sentence very long and confusing.

Currently, health checks are created for all published IPs in a DNS Record, this is fine and should continue, however we will also want to ensure we have health checks for all health check TXT records - it is possible that a host/ip combination is both an A/CNAME and a TXT record, in this case care needs to be taken to avoid creating duplicates of the same healthcheck.

#### Update response to failing health check 

After ensuring its own ClusterID is present in the relevant TXT record, the controller will count the totalClusters which is the sum of unique clusterIDs in that hosts DNS records. Then it will count the reportingClusters which is the number of clusterIDs in the relevant TXT record, if `reportingClusters/totalClusters >= HealthCheck.MultiClusterFailureThreshold` and it is not the last IP for this host then this IP will be removed for this host.

example healthcheck TXT record:
```
myapp.pb.apps.com/24.34.45.56: ghye7d34; lhoyg391
```

As this TXT record can be quite long (when many clusters are present), if this fields exceeds a DNS Record limit (255 characters), it will run into a second TXT record with the same key.

Example multiple healthcheck TXT record:
```

> myapp.pb.apps.com/24.34.45.56: ghye7d34; lhoyg391; ... <more clusterIDs>

Reviewer: Thanks @ficap your comment is timely as we have actually been discussing this internally ourselves also as we have similar concerns. Will update here with the outcome of those conversations
